Our next submitter, who is Te Hunga Roa
Māori o Aotearoa.
Welcome, Oscar, to the select committee this
morning. Um,
we have twenty minutes with you, so if you would like to, talk
us through the main points in your submission, and then we'll open up for
questions. So we'll hand over to you. Kia ora.
Ngā mihi, Catherine. I think Ms Katipo is going to kick us off, on behalf of
Te Hunga, but...
Æ, tēnā koutou e te komiti. Ko Kylie Katipo
ahau. He uri ahau nō Waikato. Kei konei hoki a
Oscar Wilson. He uri ia nō Ngāi Tahu, Ngāti
Raukawa. Uh, Oscar and I are presenting the submissions
on behalf of Te Hunga Roa Māori o Aotearoa in relation to the
bills that are before this committee.
Te Hunga Roa Māori o Aotearoa is a society established in
1988 to represent the Māori legal community.
Our vision is Mā te Ture mo te Iwi, by the law for the
people. By way of introduction, Te Hunga Roa
Māori acknowledges the need for reform of the resource management
system. However, these bills, that are before you, as
currently framed, risk diminishing Māori rights, undermining
Te Tiriti o Waitangi and Treaty settlements, and
marginalizing tikanga and mātauranga Māori in environmental
management. More must be done to ensure that any reform
does not come at the expense of Māori rights.
Enduring reforms require genuine partnership with Māori
communities, co-designing a s-system that reflects our
constitutional commitments. We support those who have already
spoken, with the committee about the impact of the bill on
Māori rights and Te Tiriti. And in our time with you this morning,
we are going to focus on two kaupapa.
Firstly, Oscar will speak with you about Tiriti obligations and Treaty
settlements, and then I will speak with you briefly around Māori
participation rights in tikanga and mātauranga
Māori. So without, further, further ado, I'll hand
over to Oscar. Kei a koe e hoa.
Mō tena koe Kylie, otirā, tena ra koutou nga kai komiti.
Um, as Ms Katipo's alluded to, I'll be speaking to the, the Hunga's
concerns relating to Treaty settlements and Treaty-related
obligations. Uh, while the bills propose a new framework
for environmental management and spatial planning, they raise fundamental
constitutional and legal concerns as to whether existing Treaty
commitments are being upheld in substance.
Now, the bills purport to recognize Treaty settlement redress and existing
participation arrangements but fail to provide the certainty,
durability, and constitutional protection that Treaty settlements
require.
Settlement redress is treated as something to be adapted to the new framework
rather than as binding constitutional commitments that the new system must
accommodate and uphold. Essential concern for Te Hunga
Roa Māori is the use of qualified and discretionary language,
particularly the requirement that settlement redress be given effect only
to the greatest extent possible.
Now, that formulation introduces uncertainty where certainty is
essential. Treaty settlements are intended to provide durable redress
for historical breaches of Te Tiriti, not to be reopened,
weakened, or renegotiated through later legislative reform.
Equivalence-based standards lower the enforceability of settlement arrangements
and create a real risk that substantive rights will be eroded over
time. The bills also impose rigid time
frames within which the Crown and post-settlement government entities,
governance entities, pardon me, are expected to reach agreement on how settlement
redress will operate under the new regime.
These time-limited processes place a dipro-disproportionate pressure
on Māori entities, many of which face ongoing capacity and
resourcing constraints, and risk default outcomes if agreement
cannot be reached in time.
If agreement cannot be reached, the bills risk, default outcomes that
weaken settlement protections by default rather than mutual
consent. There is also limited recognition for
Māori with unsettled Treaty claims.
By prioritizing settle, settled arrangements without equivalent safeguards
for iwi and hapū whose claims remain unresolved, the bills risk
entrenching inequities between Māori groups and undermining the Crown's
obligation of active protection.
In our view, reform of this scale heightens rather than diminishes the
Crown's responsibilities to those whose claims are
ongoing. Taken together, the settlement provisions do not
provide sufficient assurance that Treaty settlement redress will be upheld in
substance within the new system. As drafted, the bills risk undermining
the integrity and durability of negotiated settlements and exposing the
Crown to further Treaty breaches.
These risks are compounded by the broader dilution of Treaty
obligations across the bills. The repeal of Section six E, seven
A, and eight of the Resource Management Act removes long-standing operative
duties to recognize Māori relationships with the land,
taonga, to have particular regard to kaitiakitanga, and to take into
account Treaty principles. These provisions have long underpinned
Māori participation in environmental decision-making and informed Treaty
settlement outcomes. In their place, the bills introduced a narrowly
framed Māori interest goal and descriptive Treaty clauses that do not
impose substantive system-wide duties on
decision-makers. The Māori interest goal sits alongside other
goals with no internal hierarchy, requires only that
decision-makers seek to achieve them, and is subject to overriding
provisions elsewhere in the bills.
This represents a material weakening of the legal s-- legal status of
Treaty obligations and reframes Te Tiriti from a constitutional
foundation into a contextual consideration.
The cu-cumulative effect of these changes is to shift Māori involvement from
partnership and shared authority toward constit--
consultation-based participation.Across both
bills, Māori participation is primarily framed through procedural
consultation requirements rather than decision-making roles or shared
governance mechanisms. This approach reduce,
risks reducing Māori engagements to process
compliance rather than meaningful influence, and is inconsistent with the
principles of partnership, active protection and redress that underpin Te
Tiriti and many treaty settlements.
This dilution is also reinforced by the centralization of decision-making through
national direction and ministerial intervention.
Once national instruments and environmental limits are set, opportunity for Māori
influence at regional and local levels are significantly
constrained. Often at these very stages
is where Māori have the greatest and most enduring impacts on their decisions
relating to whenua, wai and te taiao.
Uh, the removal of an operative treaty clause also discards a
well-developed body of jurisprudence that has guided decision-making under
the RMA for almost three
decades. The bills will also require
local authorities to firmly understand the contents of any existing treaty
settlements in their takiwā, and traverse all pre-existing arrangements to
ensure those arrangements will operate with the same or equivalent
effect to the greatest extent possible under the new framework.
In our view, this comes at a cost and is a role more appropriately carried out by
the Crown as the treaty partner.
Ultimately, the responsibility to reach outcomes that are consistent with Te
Tiriti and consistent with treaty settlements rests with the Crown and
cannot be treated solely as a matter for local authorities.
Whilst local authorities have an important role in the implementation, the bills
should not rely on councils to resolve questions of equivalence,
adaptation or priority in the absence of clear statutory direction.
Without stronger protections and clearer allocation or
responsibility, the current approach risks undermining the
certainty, durability and constitutional integrity of treaty settlements,
rather than giving effect to them as enduring
commitments. Addressing these issues, in our
view, requires the reinstatement of clear, enforceable, treaty related
duties that are at least equivalent to those under the RMA, and that
operate as an effective check and balance on the exercise of statutory power.
Overall, both bills significantly centralize decision-making power at the
national level through ministerial intervention mechanisms and national direction
instruments. While consistency is an articulated objective
of the bills, this centralization reduces opportunities for Māori
influence at regional and local levels, limits
adaptability to local tikanga and mātauranga Māori, and risks
decon-- disconnecting decision-making from those most affected, being
iwi, hapū and whānau.
Once national direction is set, there are few opportunities for Māori to influence
outcomes at later stages, and in our view, this top-down approach
undermines the rangatiratanga and kaitiakitanga within rohe and
takiwā. I'll whawhai the rākau back to Ms
Katipo.
Tēnā koe, Oscar. So I'm going to touch on, a few
different matters in relation to tikanga and mātauranga Māori and
specific, aspects of the bill as I go
through my section. So to begin with, in terms of tikanga and
mātauranga Māori, the reforms do not establish,
tikanga and mātauranga, mātauranga Māori as foundational
elements of the resource management system.
Instead, they treat mātauranga Māori and tikanga as something
to be consulted or considered, rather than a knowledge
sy-system in and of itself, and that is, that has
equal standing with Western scientific methodologies.
The problem with this approach is that it limits the practical exercise of
kaitiakitanga by iwi, hapū, whānau,
Māori landowners. It fails to ensure that Māori concepts
such as mauri, whakapapa or wāhi tapu are
in, are integrated into the environment,
environmental limit setting, effects assessment or
decision-making process, processes.
And this fails to provide for the cultural landscape, which is,
unique to Aotearoa New Zealand. This, of course,
risks, as Oscar mentioned, ongoing litigation around
uncertainty, and the inadequacy of the
recognition of tikanga and mātauranga Māori.
Specifically in relation to identified Māori
land, the definition of identified Māori land in the
bill is also problematic. It's unduly narrow and doesn't
align with the established frameworks for Te Ture Whenua Māori Act,
which of course is, prefaced by the relationship of
Māori with their whenua and, obligations
arising between the Crown and Māori in relation to Te
Tiriti. This definition of identified
Māori land excludes land held for communal purposes, land
subject to outstanding treaty claims, including under the Marine and
Coastal Area Takutai Moana Act, and land held by successor
entities. It marginalizes Māori interests and limits
kaitiaki responsibilities, which don't stop at, land
boundaries. It's inconsistent with the Te Ture Whenua Māori
Act definition of general land owned by Māori, which is
not, restricted by, as it is in these
bills, by orders of the court or previous
provisions of the law, that might have applied to the change of
that status. Um, this all places a narrowed
focus on specific categories of land where
Māori-- where the Māori,
view of te taiao is holistic.And of course, this
doesn't align neatly. In relation to sites of
significance, the bill also-- the bills also adopt a
site-specific approach to recognizing, the
sites of significance to Māori, focusing on discrete
locations rather than broader cultural
landscapes. It fails to reflect the holistic relationship between
Māori and their whenua and the wai, and the te taiao broadly.
It does not provide for unconnected systems of whakapapa, tikanga, and
customary practices. It excludes the recognition of
cultural landscapes as discrete values or outcomes,
weakening the protection outco- weakening the protections as compared
to the existing RMA framework. It risks the loss of
important values associated with cultural landscapes which are integral
to both the, natural and cultural heritage.
We have concerns about the regulatory relief framework as
well. Uh, that framework poses a significant risk to
that councils will avoid identifying or protecting additional sites of
significance due to potential financial and administrative
relief obligation. It applies not only to newly
identiful- identified sites, but also to those carried over
in existing plans, which of course has the potential to lead to
reassessment, that prioritize land over interest,
landowner interests over Māori land, Māori cultural
values. It risks undermining existing protections for
Māori cultural heritage and further entrenching barriers to
recognizing sites of significance.
And in relation to, Māori participation
rights, as Oscar has, to build on what Oscar has already
spoken to you about, the role of Māori is limited primarily to
consultation rather than decision-making authority.
And for example, in relation to regional spatial planning,
once those plans are finalized, Māori concerns not reflected at that
stage are effectively locked out of subsequent
processes. The bill does not require councils to consult with
tangata whenua on appointing commissioners with tikanga or te ao Māori
expertise. Uh, nor do they require such appointments,
even where Māori interests are central.
And this, in our submission, perpetuates the decisions being made without
appropriate cultural competence and a failure
to uphold the participatory frameworks that are already
established under the RMA.
Uh, in summary, the reforms constrain, constrain Māori
participation, diminish recognition of Māori rights in relation to
land and sites of significance, and introduce new risks through the
regulatory relief framework. And, I'll, I'll just pass
back over to Oscar, who has a brief conclusion for us before we take,
any pātai or questions that you have.
Ngā kui e hoa. I, in summary, Te Hunga Roa Māori o Aotearoa
recommend, the strengthening of treaty clauses to require decision-makers to
give effect to Te Tiriti. Uh, the broadening of
definitions, of identified Māori land.
Embedding tikanga Māori and matauranga Māori as foundational elements in all
parts of the system. Uh, ensuring meaningful Māori participation at
all stages, not merely just consultation.
And protecting treaty settlement redress without qualification or
ar-arbitrary time frames. Uh, reform capable of
commanding long-term legitimacy must be co-designed,
constitutionally grounded, and supported by statutory provisions that give
practical and enforceable effect to Te Tiriti.
Uh, that, that summarizes, our submission in whole and,
yeah, we'll take any pātai now.
Kia ora. Thank you very much for your very thorough submission.
Uh, look, we will go to Lann Farm
first for a question.
Tēnā koutou. Thank you so much for that submission.
Um, I wanted to pick up on your comments about
ministerial direction and centralized powers.
And one concept that's come up from various
submitters even today is taking the ministerial
powers out of m- the minister's hands and
basically putting them with a board of
inquiry that might make recommendations to the
ministers. Are you aware of any
instances where board of inquiry processes
have actually been able to,
I guess, give due weighting and due
voice to iwi Māori, to settlement
groups, that do you think there could be a way that we could make that
system work where Māori rights and interests are
actually, catered to at that high
level?
The pātai pai. Uh, hoya no, I'm, I'm not aware of any,
situations where that has, eventuated or, you know, come to
fruition. Um, there may, there may well be, but I'm not a-aware
of that. I think fundamentally our, our biggest concern a-as Te Hunga Roa
is for the, funnel approach that's,
articulated in, in sections twelve of both of the bills in terms of
where the national policy direction sits, I guess, a-and takes
precedence over national standards, spatial plans, land use
plans. Uh, in our view, the, the spatial plans a-and land use plans are
where, iwi and hapū a-and specific takiwā and
rohe can make i-influential, decisions or, or assist in those
decisions. Um, and without that ability, I suppose having
that ability,
sit beneath the national policy direction, which will inevitably apply
more generally across Aotearoa, that's where our, our main
concerns sit. Um, so whether that's, taking the
de-decision-making power away from the minister, specifically, I'm not so
sure, and that probably needs a little bit more thought.
But, yeah, that's where our concerns lie at the moment.
Thank, thank you. Uh, Grant McCallum.
Yeah, Kia ora. Uh, thank you for your submission.
Um, I just wanna clarify something, 'cause I'm listening to your, your thorough
submission is, like, I, I'm very conscious of the fact, and
I'm a farmer myself, and a lot of number of farming com- families going through
a reconsenting process so they can carry on farming.
And, and the, at the, at, particularly in Canterbury, they are, they are having
to consult with the, and get the, basically get the approval of, of,
of the local hapū and iwi. Is that where you envisage that
process still continuing in that vein?
Is that what you, how you see that should be happening or
not?
Uh, tena koe. Um, I think it, it, it needs to happen
at all levels is what we're saying.
So there's, is value in a relationship, at every
level, that engages the environment.
And so we would see that engagement, with
Māori, on at a, at a planning and consenting
level is also fundamental to
understand what might the particular, the
particular significance of the land, its land use, and all of those
things are encapsulated at that point.
Um, not just at, at a top point as well.
So that's that, what Oscar was saying in terms of the funnel.
Ma- the Māori voice needs to be consistent throughout every stage
of the environmental management process in our
submission.
I- is, is that, is that part of your treaty-- is that actually part of treaty
obligations in your view,
at that level?
Um-
At the farming level, individual farming level?
We would say yes.
Mm.
In, in r- in the, in the, in the r- holistic worldview for Te Ao
Māori is that all things are interconnected, and
that, whenua in particular, the interconnection of that
whenua, it's important, that relationships are
engaged even at that primary level.
Thank you.
Look, we have met time. We appreciate your time.
Thank you very much, for that very thorough
insight. Um, you know, some valuable considerations there, so
appreciate your time. Thank you.
Tena koutou.
Kia ora.
So we now move on to our next submitter,
Federated
Farmers.
And we can see you there, Wayne.
Hi.
And Paul. And if we got, someone else
joining us as well.
Welcome both to-
Hi
... the select committee this afternoon.
Uh,
you have 20 minutes with us. Uh, we've got your very
weighty submission here. Um, obviously a lot to
traverse, but look, we'll hand it over to you to talk us through the main points,
and then we'll open it up for questions.
Great. Thank you, Catherine, and, thank you everyone for your time.
Um, it's great to have the opportunity to appear here today.
Um, as mentioned, my name's Wayne Langford.
I'm the current president of Federated Farmers.
I'm a Golden Bay dairy farmer.
And to be fair, I'm not overly impressed with the bill as it stands.
Uh, joining me today I have our RMA spokesperson, Mark Hooper, a dairy
farmer in Taranaki, Paul Melville and Kelly Langdon from
our, expert policy team at Federated Farmers.
Now, the principles, principles of the reform to begin, you know, I wanna
make it really clear that Federated Farmer, Farmers, sorry, supports the
intention of these reforms. Uh, we support the objective of
enabling the primary sector growth.
We support a system based on the enjoyment of property rights.
Uh, we support narrowing the scope of the effects.
We support a greater reliance on the standards that, standards and farm
plans, and we definitely support reducing the number of expensive
consents. Those are all great things to be worth,
working towards, but unfortunately, the legislation as it currently is drafted
won't deliver them. And my concern is that if this bill were to pass in its current
form, it would be significantly worse for farmers, than the current
RMA.
Now, from a farmer perspective, I'll, I'll bring it down to my, my farm, 'cause
that's where I, where I am probably a bit more of an expert.
Uh, and, and I'll let the probably the, the policy team, Paul and, and Kelly
cover off a few more questions during question time, but,
like the committee, I've, I've been through the 700-page, document.
Uh, it's, it's a fair bit of a read and it's somewhat a fair bit for a farmer
like me to get their head around. But when I'm reflecting back home to my own
situation here in Golden Bay, my wife and I, Tyler, we farm
240 dairy cows. We've got 125
hectare, dairy farm, of which about 35 hectares of that
is, is a native bush and, and, retired bush.
Uh, we run a really low stocking rate system.
A quarter of our farm, li- like I mentioned, is in, in native
diversity. Uh, our catchment is an, is an A catchment
band. Uh, and I have a farm environment plan like, many of the
other dairy farmers around the country.
Uh, this plan contains all the actions I'm taking on my farm to continue to
improve the environmental performance.
Now, I don't currently need a resource consent on my
farm, and by all measures my farm represents what most urban Kiwis want
farming to look like. Uh, I'll mention it, it, it has been on Country
Calendar, which is, which I think was just celebrated a f- a few weeks ago
as well, and, and got quite a good response there.
So what will the Natural Environment Bill mean, for me?
Under the Natural Environment Bill, my local Tasman Council, will need to set
an environmental limit for fresh water.
Now, I, I already know what that limit will be because the local catchment is
subject to water conservation order, or a
WCO. Under that bill, that, this will prevail over any
national or regional rule, meaning my catchment will, will immediately be
beyond the environmental limit.Uh, Clause 32
states that because our catchment is beyond the environmental limit, my land use
should be a discretiona- my end...
Sorry, my land use should be a discretionary activity.
This will mean spending tens, if not hundreds of thousands of dollars
on reports to get a consent to farm.
And even after going through all, all, all of that, I still not
ma- ma- I still might not even be able to get that consent.
Now, Clause 85 states that no national standards can be set,
for activities as I do my catchment breaches a- and the environmental
limits. So I'll also need a resource consent to maintain
drains, to build a wetland, or to change land use.
Something that's, you know, I consider really important to me, particularly when
I've got three young sons who might be coming home to the farm.
The staged intervention approach of the bill also means I may be subject to input
controls down the line, which is really serious stuff as
well. At best, I'll need to spend tens of thousands of dollars on consultants under
the bill to work through that as well.
At worst, I lose my... I, I lose the right to farm, and I
face walking off the land. I lose that valuable production and the valuable
resource into which we provide, for not only the community, but New
Zealand. So if I say that again, if I can't get a consent on
my farm, I can't farm and I'll need to walk off, off the
farm. In a catchment that is
100%... It has, sorry, 100% swimmable waterways, has
an outstanding effluent management compliance rate of well over
95%. For farmers across the country, that means the loss of
livelihood and their life's work.
For banks, it means mortgages not paid, and for rural communities, it means more
ghost towns, as we're seeing with, you know, significant areas of forestry and
stuff around the country. And I, I, I put it to you probably and
I ask you, you know, what for? What are we trying to achieve that for?
And is, is that achieving the goal of what we're setting out to
do? So I'll now pass on to, to Mark
Hooper, who's lead this discussion for Farmland Farms and spokesperson for RMA.
Mark, I'll hand to you.
Hi, Wayne. It's Paul Melville here.
I think Mark is having some technical details, so I'll just read through the,
um-
Just
... parts that Mark was gonna do. Are you there, Mark?
Uh, yeah. Can, can anyone hear me?
We can hear you. Yeah.
Uh, can you see me?
No, we can't see you.
Okay. That, that might be where the problem is. We'll just, run with that.
I'll just continue to, with our presentation then verbally.
Uh, so Wayne's farm might be considered unique because he has a
WCO,
but it's, it's likely that this will actually be the situation for
virtually all farmers in New Zealand under this bill.
We believe that virtually all communities in New Zealand will want to set
standards for water quality that improve water beyond the
current levels. And as soon as they do this, by
definition, they are breaching an environmental limit.
As such, A, all farms will need a resource consent,
B, they will struggle to get a consent, and C, it
won't be possible to use national standards for farming
activities. And this situation, of course, goes completely
against Cabinet's intent of having less resource
consents, relying more on national standards
and enabling primary sector growth, and this is a fundamental
flaw in the design of the legislation.
So what is the way forward? Well, we think that the bill
needs to be reframed. All areas of New
Zealand should be able to set targets, if they wish, that
improve water quality. But this shouldn't mean that all activity
stops until that target is achieved.
As a, an a- analogy on this, consider air quality in our
cities. If we want to improve air quality, we understand that we
can do this by setting standards for motor vehicles that improve
performance over time, but we don't ban all new
cars, and water quality is the same.
We can improve water quality by improving the performance of all
farmers over time, and we don't need resource consents to do
this. We have a tool already, farm
plans. Farm plans can allow all farmers to
improve performance over time, improving subsequently the
water quality over time. We can also do this by setting
standards for farming activities like drain maintenance, vegetable growing,
aerial top dressing, et cetera. As each catchment will
have a different target, standards need to flex up
or down for catchment context, which is a feature that's
already built into farm plans. I wanna finish
that we have, substantial changes outlined in our
submission on other parts of the bill to address broader
concerns. Uh, firstly, and in particular, changes to
the goals, the definition of effect and processes for
setting environmental limits are covered.
These changes are aimed at making sure councils are able to make
informed trade-offs when setting environmental limits.
Uh, secondly, that the scope of the bill is constrained to physical effects
on the natural environment, including,
spec... or, sorry, specifically excluding greenhouse
gas emissions and spiritual impacts such as the mana of the
water. We also have strong concerns
on the degree to which the bills may allow many
policy decisions to be made by ministers through secondary
legislation, concerns about mechanisms
to auction natural resources such as fresh
water, and also concerns about the broad nature of
provisions for living natural resources such as fresh
water. Wayne?
Yeah. Thanks, Mark. So to wrap up, I mean, we support the, reform
objectives of enabling primary sector growth while protecting and enhancing the
environment. But to deliver them, the bill needs substantial
changes.We have outlined some key concerns with the Natural Environment
Bill in the, the limited time that we've had here
today. Our submission contains further detail, on both the National Environment
Bill and the Planning Bill. If we get the architecture right, we can have both
the environmental improvement and economic growth.
But if we get it wrong, we suddenly risk just rebuilding the RMA, but
potentially even worse and significantly worse for farmers.
And so now I'll open up to questions. I'm happy to take on any questions.
Thanks, Catherine.
Yeah. Thank you, Wayne, for that, and obviously putting into
context your own practical farm, experience
there as well. So, look, we've got a couple of questions.
So we'll go first to Steve Abel.
Kia ora. Thank you. Thank you. Um, so many questions, but, you mentioned
the, problem of Maori land loss at one
part in your submission in terms of the impact of confiscation.
I wonder why you're so against the recognition of
sites, wahi tapu, and sites and, of biodiversity
significance to iwi Maori, whilst you recognise, much of
the land that will be protected by this legislation in terms of private
property rights
is confiscated land, i.e., it's the very land that you refer to as having
been, stolen effectively and
having property rights removed from iwi Maori.
Um, and then in the same breath, you're saying but we shouldn't recognize
that,
Maori have interests and concerns about,
the likes of biodiversity and
significant sites and
mauri of water, which is a, you know, a cultural
value as well as being an ecological value.
Uh, so, so what... Sorry. Exactly what's the question there,
Steve?
So with... In one breath you say private property rights are
important and we understand how important they are because of the loss of private
property rights in our history through colonization of Maori.
And then in the other breath you say, "We don't want to see Maori,
values recognized in terms of mauri, in terms of biodiversity, in terms
of wahi tapu."
Oh, yeah.
I can jump in if you like.
Sorry. Yeah, okay. Go, Paul.
Yeah, I think, I think, like we, we talk about the importance of property rights
and how property rights haven't always been respected in New Zealand's history, and
most famously through land confiscations from
Maori. Um, I guess you have a second issue there where a
lot of the overlays that come through, the RMA for things like outstanding
natural landscapes, sites of significance to Maori and outstanding natural
landscapes have the effect of taking property from farmers for the public
good. Now, because land was taken in the past, I wouldn't say
that therefore two wrongs make a right, and kind of taking this land again now in
the, in the, in the present is kind of, you know, due,
due justice because you've obviously-- we don't typically approach treaty
settlements that way. Treaty settlements are between the Crown, not between private
landowners and Maori. And then at the same time, y- I think there's an argument
there that these takings could be considered in the public good, so maybe they
should be allowed to occur. And we would say, "Yes, they should be allowed to
occur." Just like land can be taken for power lines or motorways or
gas lines and all these things. We accept that sometimes the government
needs to take land from farmers or from other landowners for the public good, but
we also always, under the Public Works Act, have a compensation.
We don't say, "Oh, well, your house happens to be in the way of the motorway.
It's for the public good. We're sorry." We, we say, "Well, actually the
Crown's gonna compensate you for that loss." So this is what we've said in our
submission, and I think the intent of government is to do the same.
They've outlined four specified topics which would be
subject to a compensation regime.
Um, and, and we, we kind of support that direction of travel.
We've got some comments in our submission around how we think that mechanism could
be improved to make sure that there's less, kind of litigation involved in the
process. And yet, I mean, I guess the other thing just to touch on is that,
yes, it's fair for the farmer to not have to, um...
or the homeowner who might be in the way of a motorway or, also an
SNA. But it's also efficient because what we
tend to find is that when councils don't have to pay for, outstanding
natural landscapes and the other, it's very easy to protect almost
everything, you know, up to 40% of some districts protected under an
ONL. And you've, and we've seen cost benefit assessments in
Wellington, for example, where the cost of these overlays are more than the
benefits that, that have been assessed.
But it's very easy to do it if, if the benefits fall on the community and the cost
is someone else. So where, where you have a compensation regime, it also
provides a true cost benefit test for the council.
Yep, we might wanna protect some outstanding natural landscapes and some areas of
historical significance to Maori, but we're gonna mainly focus on those that
we can justify, because if we just protect everything, well, then we're gonna be
taking on more costs than we can justify.
Can I just clarify that-
Um, sorry
... Madam Chair with a sup?
Um, yeah. Yeah, one sup.
Just a quick one. So you're interpreting bit of significant biodiversity in terms
of wahi tapu as a land take.
Uh, well, it's a regulatory taking in that if I have power lines over a
farm, there's certain things I can't do under that, under those power lines.
There's, there's limits on the activities, and there's also an impact on the value
of the farm, and we find exactly the same thing with something like an ONL or an
SNA. It's gonna limit what you can do on that farm and, and on that
land, and it's also gonna reduce the value of that land.
But given the massive impact that your industry's had on
biodiversity and that it still has on the commons in
terms of fresh water, you're now gonna further punish the
wider community and the commons by expecting it to pay to protect
the little biodiversity we have left.
So when you talk about the massive impact that farming's had on biodiversity, I
think, there's more biodiversity on farms outside of the national
park than, um... And, and, and the biodiversity on farms is, I can't
remember off the top of my head, but I think it's larger than Mount Egmont National
Park. So there's quite a... I'm not su- I don't think I agree that farmers are
having a big impact on biodiversity.You deny that farming has a massive impact on
biodiversity
Look, thank you. Thank you, Steve.
We're gonna leave it there 'cause we've got other questions from other members.
Um, Cameron Luxton.
Thank you, Chair. And it's kind of, it is a bit of a sup- I mean, Feds has
acknowledged the importance of Wai tapu and wahi tap, tupuna on sites, but
I mean, for farmers who are just trying to get on with farming, like considering
these new requirements like those included in the Gore District plan that's
been announced recently, Maori, Wairua, Whakapapa Utu, I
mean, that was under the RMA. Does Feds have a sense of whether these
requirements for consents or permits in the new system will be
out of scope or allowed in this new bill?
Yeah, you wanna continue with that one, Paul, theme that you've got there?
Yeah, thanks, Mark. Um, sorry to keep, keep going.
Look, the government's talked a lot about narrowing the scope of effects covered by
the system. When you look at the definition of effect under this
bill, it's almost identical to the RMA.
We actually think the definition of contaminant under the bill is quite good, but
the bill refers in various-- this is the Natural Environment Act, the Natural
Environment Bill to effect and contaminants in different places.
And it also says, all persons
under this act have a duty to consider adverse effects.
So, you know, if I read the first line of definition of effect, includes
irrespective of scale, intensity, duration or frequency, any positive or adverse
effect. Now we've had, that could be a spiritual
impact, like impacting the Maori.
It could be human health impact, like we've had examples of McDonald's having
to prove for a consent in Wanaka that it's not gonna impact human
health. Um, it could be, I've, I've heard stories of
water bottling plants, they have to talk about how plastic's gonna be disposed of
in China. So this just opens it up to any effect
under the sun. It could be, oh, we like the,
the, you know, we're allocating water and we're gonna allocate it to vegetable
growers before dairy farmers, et cetera.
The government's talked about an externalities based approach, and we're talking
about positive effects in here. So we just can't understand how the definition of
effect in the bill lines up with the government's intent, and we've got some
drafting proposals in our submission on how to tighten that to under the Natural
Environment Bill, physical effects on the natural environment.
So impacts on water quality, air quality, biodiversity, et
cetera.
And, and just a quick sup if I may, Chair.
That, yeah. A quick sup.
Would that, would an effect or a contaminant, say, would that,
could that be seen as, say, a, a greenhouse gas?
So say someone like Fonterra wanted to renew a consent even, or build
a new, drying facility, could that have,
could reducing emissions be part of the consideration of that under
your reading?
Yes. So the definition of contaminant talks about,
physical, chemical or biological effects on water, air,
soil, which we think is quite a tight, definition of
physical effects. But, because climate change, greenhouse gas emissions are
covered under the Climate Change Response Act, it should also specifically exclude
that effect, because we don't want, you know, we're doing work through
various things to reduce on-farm emissions, or you might even have a resource
consent for the likes of New Zealand Steel, and you could have,
conditions put in there on how you must reduce your emissions to get the resource
consent. And we've seen, this come and go in the RMA in the
past. Um, and so I think, look, the government's intent in the cabinet
paper was to keep greenhouse gas emissions out of this framework.
But the way we read this bill, it hasn't been
done.
Look, thank you, Paul. Look, I'm just gonna jump in with a quick question because
obviously you focused a lot of the submission on the environmental
limits. Um, and you know, obviously a lot of farmers out there that are working
hard in their catchment areas and are meeting their environmental
targets. Um, a- and you talk about the freshwater farm
plans and the fact that, you know, potentially we're gonna see more
duplication, which is obviously not the intent of this.
Uh, a- as the system is working at the moment with farmers and their
freshwater farm plans, can you just give us, a bit of an elaboration on
that in terms of, you know, from, from your group, how you feel it's, it
is working?
Yeah, look, I can, touch just briefly on that.
Uh, I, I think the, the key message from our perspective in
terms of farm plans is that there should be a mechanism
that replaces, existing regulation,
not add to it. And so that's it, that's where our primary concern
sits, because as it stands at present, the way it's drafted, you are
required to have a freshwater farm plan, as well as because of the
environmental limit situation that you just touched on, you may need a
discretionary resource consent as well.
So, so that would obviously be the, the worst of both worlds.
Uh, one of the other provisions that we have around, farm
plans
is that there's recognition of existing industry plans,
and so these are, are widely used, across the sector already
and, and often very much in a, in a
unregulated, kind of environment.
They might be part of a processor, a system, part of a quality assurance
program, part of a wider, catchment,
maybe sediment control, plan or something like
that. So there's a wide range of those that do target what the specific
environmental risks are for that environment.
And so that's the key, I think, is that going forward, farm plans need to
be, they need to be
developed in such a way that they identify the relative
risk that's, that's, that's faced in that catchment.
And so that would be a key focus that we would have, that they are an effective
tool. Uh, there's a lot of them out there.
They are working, but let's keep them on track and on target
and not become a, an additional regulatory burden such that, you
know, farmers are less likely to use them or, reduce them to a box ticking
exercise.
Look, thanks for that. Look, we have, gone over time,
but we appreciate your time. We appreciate your really,
thorough submission. Obviously, a lot of other points in the submission as well,
which haven't been traversed, today, but, we do
appreciate your submission, so thank you.
Thank you. Thank you for having us.
Thanks, committee. Yes
So now moving on to our next submitter, which is Te
Arawa Lakes
Trust.
And we can see Te Arawa Lakes Trust there.
Yeah, if you just want to, well,
cam--
Uh,
if you just want to pop your camera on there.
We can see you've popped up, but we just can't see you or hear you
yet.
Apologies, we'll be there in a minute.
Oh, brilliant. We can hear you.
Oh, great.
Yes.
Our technician is just playing with this machine, and we'll be there in a sec.
Oh, that's right. Technology can be challenging at
times.
Kia ora.
Oh, kia ora.
There we go. We can see you. Uh, welcome to the select
committee this afternoon. Uh, you have twenty minutes with us, so we'll
hand it over to you to talk us through your submission, but do take it as read, and
then, of course, we'll open for questions. So thank you.
Absolutely. Um, thank you. Thank you for the opportunity.
E ngā mana, e ngā reo, e ngā rangatira mā mō, mō te-- o, o
te committee tēnei. Uh, tēnā rā koutou katoa.
Uh, and thank you for the opportunity to present today on behalf of Te Arawa Lakes
Trust. Uh, my name is Wally Haumaha.
I'm the Chair of the Trust, which is the oldest Māori trust board in the country
that was formed in nineteen twenty-four.
So we've been around a long, long time.
I would like to begin with the words that sit at the heart of our relationship with
the Crown, the Crown's apology and the Te Arawa Lakes Settlement of,
Settlement Act of two thousand and six.
In that apology, the Crown acknowledged that its actions undermined the
rangatiratanga of Te Arawa over our lakes, and that those
actions caused significant prejudice to Te Arawa and our ability to
exercise our responsibilities as
kaitiaki. The Crown expressed its regret and its
commitment to restore the relationship and atone for those wrongs.
Those words matter deeply to our people.
But as we consider the proposed reforms to the resource management system,
Te Arawa Lakes Trust is concerned that we may once again be facing
legislative change that risks repeating the very failures the
Crown apologized for.
The Lakes Trust is the statutory owner of the beds of fourteen lakes in the Rotorua
district, and through our settlement, we share government's
responsibilities for the health and restoration of those
lakes. Our submission to this committee is grounded in one
central question: Will the new resource management system
preserve the settlement arrangements that Parliament has already
recognized and enacted? Moreover, will these
proposed changes protect the lakes of Te Arawa from further
degradation? As currently drafted, the bills risk
reducing treaty settlement arrangements to goals that sit alongside
competing development objectives
rather than binding commitments that must be upheld.
That would fundamentally alter the balance struck in the
settlement. We want to be clear, Te Arawa supports the
need to improve and streamline the RMA.
Our communities need a system that enable infrastructure, housing, economic
development, but efficiency must not come at the cost or the
expense of our environment, of our taiao.
For Te Arawa, the health of our lakes is inseparable from the well-being of our
people and the prosperity of our region through tourism,
recreation, culture. Local livelihoods will depend on the
health of these waters. Strong economy and healthy
environment are not competing objectives.
They depend on each other. Te Arawa Lake settlement
recognized our ownership of the lake beds and established governance
arrangements to restore and protect these lakes for future
generations. Those arra-ra-arrangements are not policy
preferences, they are legislated commitments to the Crown-- of the Crown.
If the Crown chooses to redesign the res-- the RMA, then the protections that
underpin our settlement must travel with that reform.
In simple terms, the new system must deliver the same or
equivalent legal effect for our settlement as the
current Resource Management Act framework provides today.
Anything less risks undermining the integrity of treaty settlements
themselves. Te Arawa Lakes Trust, therefore, supports
reform that improves efficiency, but reform must strengthen, not
dilute, the mechanisms that protect our taiao and honor the
Crown's commitment under Te Tiriti o Waitangi.
The key issues and concerns the proposed bills as drafted do not
guarantee the preservation of the Te Arawa Lakes settlement, our
statutory lake bed ownership, or the co-governance arrangements
and decision-making frameworks established by law.
Settlement-derived rights risk being subordinated to development
objectives, and treaty obligations are reduced to
procedural engagement rather than substantive
protection. There is no explicit embedding of
settlement-specific governance, no guarantee of
represente-representation for Te Arawa in statutory
bodies, and no protection for unsettled hapū within collective
arrangements. These changes threaten to transform
binding agree, settlement rights into discretionary matters,
which is consistent with the constitutional status of treaty
settlements. And the importance of structural protectio-protection
for Te Arawa Lakes settlement resolved long-standing grievances and
legally vested the lake beds in Te Arawa alongside statutory
co-governance and Crown obligations for
restoration.These are legislated outcomes and
not simply symbolic recognition or cultural
acknowledgments. Any new regime for environmental limits or
planning must not erode these legal rights or subordinate
them to general policy goals. Structural
protection must be embedded in primary legislation and national
direction, not left to future negotiation or regional
discretion.
Te Tua Papa is the integrated environmental and cultural framework for Te Arawa's
exercise of Kaitiakitanga and settlement rights.
It must be recognised as a statutory policy statement with
binding effect, not ordinary. Failure would undermine both
the legal framework and the practical restoration efforts made
by Te Arawa. The settlement established shared outcomes, not
just consultation. Te Arawa must have guaranteed structural
representation in all statutory decision-making affecting our
lakes, including spatial planning, environmental limit
setting, and national direction.
This representation must be permanent and not left to the
discretion of central or regional government.
Our recommendations therefore, Te Arawa Lakes Trust urges the
committee to ensure that settlement rights, propriety
interests, and governance arrangements are explicitly
and permanently protected in primary legislation.
Te Tua Papa o Ngā Wai o Te Arawa is recognised as a
statutory policy statement with binding effect.
Te Arawa representation in decision-making is guaranteed,
not discretionary or consultative.
Transitional or time limit, limited mechanisms are
avoided. Protections must be permanent,
structural, and not subject to renegotiation or
inquiry. Both acts explicitly recognise
the Te Arawa Lakes Settlement Act 2006, the
Rotorua Te Arawa Lakes Strategy Group, and the statutory role of Te
Arawa Lakes Trust, Trust. So in sum, we
seek that treaty settlement rights are structurally and permanently protected
within the new RMA system with
explicit priority and directive effect.
This is set-- is essential to maintain the integrity of our two thousand
and six settlement and the Crown's obligations under Te
Tiriti o Waitangi. Nō reira, tena koutou katoa.
Those are my opening statements. Thank you.
And any hard questions, I will refer to my technicians on the side of
me.
Kia ora, thank you for that submission.
Look, we'll go first to Steve Abel with a
question.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you for the excellent
substantive submission. Um,
kia ora, koroua, uh-
Kia ora.
What's the extent of the concern
that a legislative framework that doesn't
explicitly embed
treaty obligations
will
effectively cause
fu-future treaty, treaty breaches,
and also, as you have articulated, breach
the settlement that you already have with the Crown?
Sorry, I'm sorry, what was the question?
Yeah, what is the extent of that concern?
I mean, is it in-inherent in this current drafting of the
bill that you perceive that will occur?
There will effectively be, because of the lack of an
obligation for treaty to be upheld in terms of the engagement with
you as an iwi, that that will force the Crown to a
position of further breaches and,
failure to effect the existing settlement that the, the Crown has
with you.
Yes, and I think as our chair, rightly sort of pointed out,
you know, the foundations of our settlement, but, you know, also more
so with the, Crown's obligations
as, to and as a Te Tiriti partner,
the implications that we see of-- for that, of course, it, it does
unravel, what we've sort of set in that foundation for our lakes.
Um, and I think, too, around that, it's not--
we've-- we believe the Te Arawa Lakes Trust, or our Settlement Act is not
an ordinary statute. You know, it gives legis-legislative effect to a
negotiated settlement, of our taonga.
So, you know, specifically and to and for our lakes.
So, you know, this, it, the, the
implications as we've, you know, submitted to are,
are far-reaching, not just for our lakes, but also the mana of
our, Te Arawa iwi and hapū.
I would hate to see the, legislative framework that we were acting
under, under the two thousand and six, outcome, Steve, that
those, cultural acknowledg-acknowledgments become
diminished in any shape or form. And that the new
regime, as I pointed out, for envi- planning environmental
limits, cannot erode the legal rights
and, or subordinate them to, as, as I mentioned, to general
policy position for Te Arawa. So any-- When, when we're talking about
consultation, part of the structural protection of our lakes,
they must be embedded in the, in, in the primary legislation under
this, under this reform, so that it doesn't, doesn't erode our
decision-making and our right to, work
in, in, in a governance or regional capability, that we
have a strong voice in any sort of decision-making that
affect or have an impact on our waterways.
Yeah. Can I ask a sup on that, Madam Chair?
Y-yes, you can, Steve.
Thank you. Um,
is it, is it your interpretation that what
for you may be Kaitiaki obligations
to, uh-Wai Māori to
the lakes, to the, the health of the,
the water in your rohe
is not interpreted by the
legislation as
being of a, an equivalent standing even
to the property rights of private
landowners. So that,
that seems to be what this legislation does, is it
structurally diminishes,
the long-term intergenerational,
commitment of you as an iwi
to upholding, protecting, and improving the health of, uh-
Yeah
... the lakes. And-
Yeah, that, that's a good question. Mm.
Yeah.
Dave, and I think, you know, why when we say our Treaty settlement is
unique, and as our chair sort of mentioned, you know, we were
provided with, the title to the lakebeds along with our
settlement.
Mm.
So, you know, essentially we-- I mean, the system doesn't currently make
it easy for us to have to participate at a statutory which
the settlement provides, but also as a land or owner of the
lakebed-
Yeah
... so essentially gives us two bites at that pie.
So as kaitiaki or, or in Te Ao where we refer to as hunga tiaki,
where it enables, you know, our settlement does enable us to
have,
participate in, and I guess as pr- as property rights, with property
rights, but also be able to sort of fully,
express and participate as hunga tiaki.
Um, that's how we view it, and that's how we
currently, sort of are so far in
implementing our cultural values framework through our
co-governance, through our settlement, our c-
co-governance, grouping, the Rohe o Te Arawa Lakes Strategy
Group. Um, you know, so
when we look at that, when we look at the removal of,
Part 2, Section 6E and 7A, you
know, that, that specifically directly impacts,
um... Well,
I guess our primary,
issue there is that w- those interests
are, of course, being, removed to
specifically be provided for as, Māori
goal. Um, in terms, the fr- as we understood it to
be when our settlement was written and-
Mm
... against the Resource Management Act, in protecting our
lakes and our relationships to it.
You know, that was our expectation.
Um, but now that expectation is now broken, with removal
of those sec- of Part 2 and those sections.
Um, for us, those are not minor provisions.
Um, you know, they are the legal backbone, as our chair, sort of mentioned,
that gave our settlement its, operational force.
So, you know, when we look at Section 6E, it
elevated our relationship with our lakes to a matter of national
importance.
Mm.
You know, that's how we consider it.
When we look at our lakes, it's not just, as important to
Te Arawa, its iwi, its hapū, its relationship to, its connection to, but
we also share that with community.
We also share that, with tourists,
both national and international.
So, you know, the scale of that, goes sort of far and wide
for us. So,
yeah. So the RMA has had its flaws, let's
talk about that. Um, and our lakes have declined under it, and it
hasn't been an easy process for us to navigate with our
hapū.
Mm.
Um, but as we mentioned in our submission, Te Tūāpapa o Ngā
Wai, our cultural values framework, is now embedded,
as, and also our partners around that, the
two councils alongside us, have agreed
to ensure that the vision and strategy to
2050 is through a Te Arawa lens. Um, even more
so, Te Tūāpapa o Ngā Wai, our cultural values framework,
is set as the objective to which we as
partners or co-management or co-,
set the sustainable use and management of all of our lakes, and
that had been achieved. That's our team on.
Um, so
the issue for us practically is it will unwind, it will
unravel. Um, this is 20 years-
Mm
... 20 years to this year, 2026, that our settlement
was signed. So, yeah, we, we
can't let that happen.
Super clear. Thank you.
Thank you. Look, we will take one last question from Lann
Farm.
Tena koutou, thank you so much for your submission and those comments just
then. Um, my question is really just a
supplementary on that. Um,
we're getting from Te Arawa Lakes Trust essentially what
we hear consistently from a lot of,
iwi Māori and settled groups, and that's
essentially a whole lot of good faith.
And you, you mentioned, you know, the, the 20 years essentially of good faith
of working constructively with the Crown, and yet we're sort
of treating this bill as almost just
another bill-
Mm
... which, which has, you know, been the case with this government, where it just
sort of goes through, under some form of
urgency. Do you think we're actually
maybe hugely underestimating the
implications of if this bill is to go forward without
serious changes to the
role and rights of iwi Māori, that essentially we will
actually beRisking the grinding to a
halt of everything that is, you know, sort of
portrayed as this will make the system more efficient.
Um, but what if the good faith from the likes of yourself
were to be removed from Te Arawa Lakes Trust rohe?
What impact would that really have on the
system?
Well, it would certainly have an impact on our pro- pri- proprietary interests,
interests or, subjugate them
to, general development goals, which is not what the act
intended. And I think, Te Arawa's long-standing
claims, must ensure that the vesting of the
lake, lake, lake, bed ownership in Te Arawa was
a legal property right, and as I said earlier, not a symbolic g-
recognition or symbolic gesture.
Um, we work closely in, in, in
partnership with, as I said, with the regional council, Bay of Plenty Regional
Council and Te Arawa Lakes Council, and that relationship has been
quite strong. However, in terms of Te Arawa
asserting its proprietary interests and rights to look at,
the quality of our, our lakes, the future of our
city depends on water quality, as I mentioned, inside of
tourism, inside of the economic development, the social development, agriculture,
fishing. All of those issues have an impact, and Te Arawa have, have
been, as I said, a major,
partner in working over many, many years
i-i-in, as I referred to, the oldest established trust board
in the country, working alongside our local government and central
government. So any right impact on us through a segment of
decision-making.
Um-
Look, thank you very much. Uh, we have met
time. Uh, we appreciate your time, and your very
thorough submission and all of those considerations, so thank
you.
Thank you.
You're welcome.
Uh, look, members, that brings us to the end of our morning session
this morning. Uh, so we will resume again at
ten past one for our next submitter, who will be
Mercury.